+++
title = "Values and data types"
weight = 201
+++

A **value** is a piece of concrete data like a letter or a number that a program manipulates. 
Some of the values we have seen so far are ```5``` (the
result when we added ```2+3```), and ```"Hello World!"```.

The values are stored in the computer's memory as sequences of zeros and ones. 
To distinguish a series of zeros and ones that represent the integer ```5``` from the 
letter ```c```, a high-level language associates to each value a **data type**, which 
includes all the possible values of the type and the operations allowed on that type.

In your math classes, you learned about types of numbers including whole numbers, counting 
numbers, integers, rationals (fractions) and reals. The allowed values for integers are 
```..., -2, -1, 0, 1, 2,...```. You learned that you can add and subtract integers and 
the result will be an integer, but there are pairs of integers that when divided 
the result is not an integer. Integers are the data type. Possible values are some 
mathematical integers (with limits because the computer does not have infinite memory), and 
operations addition, subtraction, and multiplication.

The type of ```"Hello, World!"``` is *str* (short for string). String values are
enclosed in quotation marks.

If you are unsure of the type of a value, use the Python function
called ```type``` to find it as shown below. 

```
>>> type("Hello, World!")
<class 'str'>
>>> type(17)
<class 'int'>
```

Not surprisingly, strings belong to the type **str** and integers belong to the
type **int**. Less obviously, numbers with a decimal point belong to a type
called **float**, because these numbers are represented in a format called
*floating-point*. 
```
>>> type(3.2)
<class 'float'>
```

What about values like ```"17"``` and ```"3.2"```? They look like numbers, but they
are in quotation marks like strings.

```
>>> type("17")
<class "str">
>>> type(";3.2";)
<class "str">
```

They are strings!

Strings in Python can be enclosed in either single quotes (```'```) or double quotes
(```"```), or three of each (```'''``` or ```"""```)</p>
```
>>> type('This is a string.')
<class "str">
>>> type("And so is this.")
<class "str">
>>> type('''and this.''')
<class "str">
>>> type("""and even this...""")
<class "str">
```

Double quoted strings can contain single quotes inside them, as in
```"Bruce's beard"```, and single quoted strings can have double quotes
inside them, as in ```'The knights who say "Ni!"'```.
Strings enclosed with three occurrences of either quote symbol are called triple-quoted strings.  They can
contain either single or double quotes:
```
>>> print(""""Oh no", she exclaimed, "Ben's bike is broken!"""")
"Oh no", she exclaimed, "Ben's bike is broken!"
```

Triple quoted strings can even span multiple lines:
```
>>> message = """This message will
... span several
... lines."""
>>> print(message)
This message will
span several
lines.
```

Python does not differentiate between the use of single or double quotes or
the three-of-a-kind quotes to surround your strings:
once it has parsed the text of your program or command, the way it stores the
value is identical in all cases, and the surrounding quotes are not part of
the value. But when the interpreter wants to display a string, it has to
decide which quotes to use to make it look like a string.

```
>>> "This is a string."
"This is a string."
>>> """And so is this."""
"And so is this."
```

The Python language designers usually chose to surround their strings with single quotes.  What do think would happen if the string already
contained single quotes?

When you type a large integer, you might be tempted to use commas between
groups of three digits, as in ```42,000```. This is not a legal integer in
Python, but it does mean something else, which is legal:

```
>>> 42000
42000
>>> 42,000
(42, 0)
```

Well, that is not what we expected at all! Because of the comma, Python treats the value as a *pair*.  
We will learn about pairs later.
But, for the moment, remember not to put commas or spaces in your integers, no matter
how big they are. Also revisit what we said in the previous chapter: formal languages are
strict, the notation is concise, and even the smallest change might
mean something quite different from what you intended.

**Exercise 1**. Take the sentence: *Every cloud has a silver lining.*

Store each word in a separate variable, then print out the sentence on *one* line using six print statements.

Note: You will have to add a second argument to change the end from new line to empty string.

```print("Hello, world!", end="")```

**Exercise 2.** Write a *single* string containing two sentences. Use the
escape character ```'\n'``` to separate the sentences.

Print the string. What do you observe?