+++
title = "Variable names and keywords"
weight = 203
+++

**Variable names** can be arbitrarily long. They can contain both letters and
digits, but they have to begin with a letter or an underscore. Although it is legal to use
uppercase letters, by convention we don&#8217;t. If you do, remember that case
matters. ```Bruce``` and ```bruce``` are different variables.

The underscore character (```_```) can appear in a name. It is often used in
names with multiple words, such as ```my_name``` or ```price_of_tea_in_china```.
For variable names, a common convention is to use something called <em>mixedCase</em>, where
multiple words are combined together and every word except the first is capitalized. So, for example, using mixedCase we would have the variables ```myName``` or ```priceOfTeaInChina```.

There are some situations in which names beginning with an underscore have
special meaning, so a safe rule for beginners is to start all names with a letter.

If you give a variable an illegal name, you get a syntax error:

```
>>> 76trombones = "big parade"
SyntaxError: invalid syntax
>>> more$ = 1000000
SyntaxError: invalid syntax
>>> class = "Computer Science 101"
SyntaxError: invalid syntax
```

```76trombones``` is illegal because it does not begin with a letter.  ```more$```
is illegal because it contains an illegal character, the dollar sign. But
what&#8217;s wrong with ```class```?

It turns out that ```class``` is one of the Python **keywords**. Keywords define
the language&#8217;s syntax rules and structure, and they cannot be used as variable names.

As of this writing, Python has 33 keywords (and every now and again improvements to Python
introduce or eliminate one or two):

<table border="1" class="docutils">
<colgroup>
<col width="25%" />
<col width="25%" />
<col width="25%" />
<col width="25%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody valign="top">
<tr class="row-odd"><td>False</td>
<td>def</td>
<td>if</td>
<td>raise</td>
</tr>
<tr class="row-even"><td>None</td>
<td>del</td>
<td>import</td>
<td>return</td>
</tr>
<tr class="row-odd"><td>True</td>
<td>elif</td>
<td>in</td>
<td>try</td>
</tr>
<tr class="row-even"><td>and</td>
<td>else</td>
<td>is</td>
<td>while</td>
</tr>
<tr class="row-odd"><td>as</td>
<td>except</td>
<td>lambda</td>
<td>with</td>
</tr>
<tr class="row-even"><td>assert</td>
<td>finally</td>
<td>nonlocal</td>
<td>yield</td>
</tr>
<tr class="row-odd"><td>break</td>
<td>for</td>
<td>not</td>
<td>&nbsp;</td>
</tr>
<tr class="row-even"><td>class</td>
<td>from</td>
<td>or</td>
<td>&nbsp;</td>
</tr>
<tr class="row-odd"><td>continue</td>
<td>global</td>
<td>pass</td>
<td>&nbsp;</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
You might want to keep this list handy. You&#8217;ll learn what most of these keywords mean as you progress through this book. You can also type ```help('keywords')``` in the shell
to see a list of the Python keywords. Also, when you type a keyword in IDLE, it should appear in orange. If the interpreter complains about one
of your variable names and you don&#8217;t know why, see if it is on this list.

Programmers generally choose names for their variables that are meaningful to
the human readers of the program &#8212;
they help the programmer document, or remember, what the variable is used for.
