+++
title = "Operators and operands"
weight = 206
+++

**Operators** are special tokens that represent computations like addition,
multiplication and division. The values the operator uses are called **operands**.

The following are all legal Python expressions whose meaning is more or less
clear:

```
20+32   hour-1   hour*60+minute   minute/60   5**2   (5+9)*(15-7)
```

The tokens ```+```, ```-```, and ```*```, and the use of parenthesis for grouping,
mean in Python what they mean in mathematics. The asterisk (```*```) is the
token for multiplication, and ```**``` is the token for exponentiation.

```
>>> 2 ** 3
8
>>> 3 ** 2
9
```

When a variable name appears in the place of an operand, it is replaced with
its value before the operation is performed.

Addition, subtraction, multiplication, and exponentiation all do what you
expect.

Example: so let us convert 645 minutes into hours:

```
>>> minutes = 645
>>> hours = minutes / 60
>>> hours
10.75
```

In Python 3, the division operator ```/``` always yields a floating point result.
What we might have wanted to know was how many *whole* hours there are, and how many minutes remain.
Python gives us two different flavors of the division operator.
The second, called **floor division** uses the token ```//```.
Its result is always a whole number and if it has to adjust the number it always
moves it to the left on the number line.  So ```6 // 4``` yields ```1```, but ```-6 // 4``` might surprise you!

```
>>> 7 / 4
1.75
>>> 7 // 4
1
>>> minutes = 645
>>> hours = minutes // 60
>>> hours
10
```

The **modulus operator** works on integers (and integer expressions) and gives
the remainder when the first number is divided by the second. In Python, the
modulus operator is a percent sign (```%```). The syntax is the same as for other
operators. It has the same precedence as the multiplication operator.


```
>>> q = 7 // 3     # This is integer division operator
>>> print(q)
2
>>> r  = 7 % 3
>>> print(r)
1
```

So 7 divided by 3 is 2 with a remainder of 1.

The modulus operator turns out to be surprisingly useful. For example, you can
check whether one number is divisible by another. If ```x % y``` is zero, then
```x``` is divisible by ```y```.

Also, you can extract the right-most digit or digits from a number.  For
example, ```x % 10``` yields the right-most digit of ```x``` (in base 10).
Similarly ```x % 100``` yields the last two digits.

It is also extremely useful for doing conversions, say from seconds
to hours, minutes and seconds. Here is a program that asks the user to enter
some seconds, and it converts them into hours, minutes, and remaining seconds.

```
# ask user for the total number of seconds
totalSecs = int(input("How many seconds, in total?"))

# compute hours, minutes, seconds
hours = totalSecs // 3600
secsStillRemaining = totalSecs % 3600
minutes =  secsStillRemaining // 60
secsFinallyRemaining = secsStillRemaining  % 60

# print the result
print("Hrs=" + str(hours) + " Mins=" + str(minutes) +
        " Secs=" + str(secsFinallyRemaining))
```

**Exercise 3**. What type do you think the following expressions have?
```1.0 + 1```
```'3.14'```
```4//2```
Use the Python interpreter to check your answers.

**Exercise 4.** Define a variable ```x``` and initialize it to the value of the expression ```6 * 1 - 2```.

Add parenthesis to the expression ```6 * 1 - 2``` to change its value from ```4``` to ```-6```. Initialize a variable ```y``` with the new expression.

Print both variables.

**Exercise 5.** If we run the code below, the Python interpreter reports an error. Explain the error in your own words.

```
z + 4
print(z)
```

**Exercise 6**. Fix the error so that the output of the program is ```8```.

```
# Fix the error
z + 4
print(z)
```

**Exercise 7**. Evaluate mentally the following numerical expressions. Record your answers below.

```5 % 2```

```9 % 5```

```15 % 12```

```12 % 15```

```6 % 6```

```0 % 7```

```7 % 0```

**Exercise 8**. Use the Python interpreter to check your results.


**Exercise 9**. What happened with the last example? Why? If you were able to correctly anticipate the computer’s response in all but the last one, it is time to move on. If not, take time now to make up examples of your own. Explore the modulus operator until you are confident you understand how it works.