+++
title = "Order of operations"
weight = 208
+++

When more than one operator appears in an expression, the order of evaluation
depends on the **rules of precedence**. Python follows the same precedence
rules for its mathematical operators that mathematics does. The acronym PEMDAS
(which some people remember as &#8220;Please Excuse My Dear Aunt Sally&#8221;)
is a useful way to remember the order of operations:

<ol class="arabic">
<li><p class="first">**P**arentheses have the highest precedence and can be used to force an
expression to evaluate in the order you want. Since expressions in
parentheses are evaluated first, ```2 * (3-1)```\ is 4, and ```(1+1)**(5-2)```\ is
8. You can also use parentheses to make an expression easier to read, as in
```(minute * 100) / 60```\, even though it doesn&#8217;t change the result.

</li>
<li><p class="first">**E**xponentiation has the next highest precedence, so ```2**1+1```\ is 3 and
not 4, and ```3*1**3```\ is 3 and not 27.

</li>
<li><p class="first">**M**ultiplication and both **D**ivision operators have the same precedence, which is
higher than **A**ddition and **S**ubtraction, which also have the same
precedence. So ```2*3-1```\ yields 5 rather than 4, and ```5-2*2```\ is 1, not 6.

</li>
<li><p class="first">Operators with the *same* precedence are evaluated from left-to-right. In algebra
we say they are *left-associative*.  So in
the expression ```6-3+2```\, the subtraction happens first, yielding 3. We then add
2 to get the result 5. If the operations had been evaluated from
right to left, the result would have been ```6-(3+2)```\, which is 1.  (The acronym
PEDMAS could mislead you to thinking that division has higher precedence than multiplication,
and addition is done ahead of subtraction - don&#8217;t be misled.
Subtraction and addition are at the same precedence, and the left-to-right rule applies.)

<ul>
<li><p class="first">An exception to the left-to-right left-associative rule
is the exponentiation operator ```**```\, so a useful hint is to always use
parentheses to force exactly the order you want when exponentiation is involved:


```
>>> 2 ** 3 ** 2     # The right-most ** operator gets done first!
512
>>> (2 ** 3) ** 2   # Use parentheses to force the order you want!
64
```

The immediate mode command prompt of Python is great for exploring and experimenting
with expressions like this.
