+++
title = "Composition"
weight = 211
+++

So far, we have looked at the elements of a program &#8212; variables, expressions,
statements, and function calls &#8212; in isolation, without talking about how to combine them.

One of the most useful features of programming languages is their ability to
take small building blocks and **compose** them into larger chunks.

For example, we know how to get the user to enter some input, we know how to
convert the string we get into a float, we know how to write a complex expression, and
we know how to print values. Let&#8217;s put these together in a small four-step program that
asks the user to input a value for the radius of a circle, and then
computes the area of the circle from the formula

Area = pi * r^2

Firstly, we&#8217;ll do the four steps one at a time:


```
response = input("What is your radius? ")
r = float(response)
area = 3.14159 * r**2
print("The area is " + str(area))
```

Notice that we have to convert the value of the variable ```area``` to a string before we can print it. If we don&#8217;t, we get an error:


```
response = input("What is your radius? ")
r = float(response)
area = 3.14159 * r**2
print("The area is " + area)
```

We get a runtime error in the above program because Python doesn&#8217;t know how to &#8220;add&#8221; a string and a float. We need to convert the float to a string before we can add (that is, concatenate) it to the string ```"The area is "```.

Now let&#8217;s compose the first two lines into a single line of code, and compose the
second two lines into another line of code.

```
r = float( input("What is your radius? ") )
print("The area is " + str(3.14159 * r**2))
```

If we really wanted to be tricky, we could write it all in one statement:

```
print("The area is " + str(3.14159 * float(input("What is your radius? "))**2))
```

Such compact code may not be most understandable for humans, but it does
illustrate how we can compose bigger chunks from our building blocks.

If you&#8217;re ever in doubt about whether to compose code or fragment it into smaller steps,
try to make it as simple as you can for the human to follow.  My choice would
be the first case above, with four separate steps.

