+++
title = "The modulus operator"
weight = 212
+++

The **modulus operator** works on integers (and integer expressions) and gives
the remainder when the first number is divided by the second. In Python, the
modulus operator is a percent sign (```%```). The syntax is the same as for other
operators. It has the same precedence as the multiplication operator.


```
>>> q = 7 // 3     # This is integer division operator
>>> print(q)
2
>>> r  = 7 % 3
>>> print(r)
1
```

So 7 divided by 3 is 2 with a remainder of 1.

The modulus operator turns out to be surprisingly useful. For example, you can
check whether one number is divisible by another&#8212;if ```x</span> <span class="pre">%</span> <span class="pre">y``` is zero, then
```x``` is divisible by ```y```.

Also, you can extract the right-most digit or digits from a number.  For
example, ```x</span> <span class="pre">%</span> <span class="pre">10``` yields the right-most digit of ```x``` (in base 10).
Similarly ```x</span> <span class="pre">%</span> <span class="pre">100``` yields the last two digits.

It is also extremely useful for doing conversions, say from seconds,
to hours, minutes and seconds. So let&#8217;s write a program to ask the user to enter
some seconds, and we&#8217;ll convert them into hours, minutes, and remaining seconds.

```
# ask user for the total number of seconds
totalSecs = int(input("How many seconds, in total?"))

# compute hours, minutes, seconds
hours = totalSecs // 3600
secsStillRemaining = totalSecs % 3600
minutes =  secsStillRemaining // 60
secsFinallyRemaining = secsStillRemaining  % 60

# print the result
print("Hrs=" + str(hours) + " Mins=" + str(minutes) +
        " Secs=" + str(secsFinallyRemaining))
```


We see a neat little trick in the above program: the ```print``` statement in line 11
extends over into line 12. This is OK&#8212;when the program runs, Python will figure out that the statement on line 11 hasn&#8217;t finished yet and continues onto line 12. It&#8217;s usually a good idea to indent your second line a bit so that&#8217;s it&#8217;s clear to a human that the previous line hasn&#8217;t finished yet.

We also see how comments make a long program easier for a human to read. Get in the habit of writing comments as part of your programs!
