+++
title = "Formal and natural languages"
weight = 101
+++

As noted in the introduction, this course teaches you how to think like a 
computer scientist. A crucial aspect of a computer scientist's job is to 
communicate solutions to people and machines. We use two languages to communicate.

## Natural and Formal Languages

**Natural languages** are the languages that people speak, such as English,
Spanish, and French. They were not designed by people (although people try to
impose some order on them); they evolved naturally.

**Formal languages** are languages that are designed by people for specific
applications. For example, the notation that mathematicians use is a formal
language that is particularly good at denoting relationships among numbers and
symbols. Chemists use formal language to represent the chemical structure of
molecules. 

Natural and formal languages are alike in important ways. They both have rules 
to describe what words are part of the language, and what word combinations are valid.
We call these rules **syntax**. While some sentences are correctly constructed according
to the syntactic rules, only some sentences have a meaning in the language.

Formal languages tend to have strict rules about syntax. For example, ```3+3=6```
is a syntactically correct mathematical statement, but ```3=+6``` is not.
The statement is structurally illegal because you cannot place a plus sign immediately after an equal sign.

H<sub>2</sub>O is a syntactically correct chemical name, but <sub>2</sub>Zz is
not. There is no chemical element with the symbol Zz. In addition, molecular formulas 
have to have subscripts after the element name, not before. The formula <sub>2</sub>Zz
is also structurally illegal.

Although formal and natural languages have many features in common, including 
structure, syntax, and semantics, there are many differences.

Natural languages are full of **ambiguity**, which people deal with by
using contextual clues and other information. Formal languages are
designed to be nearly or completely unambiguous, which means that any
statement has exactly one meaning, regardless of context.

To make up for ambiguity and reduce misunderstandings, natural
languages employ **redundancy**. As a result, they are often
verbose.  Formal languages are less redundant and more concise.

Formal languages mean exactly what they say.  On the other hand, natural languages
use idioms and metaphors. If someone says, ``The
other shoe fell'', there is probably no shoe and nothing falling.

The meaning of a computer program is unambiguous and literal and can
be understood entirely by analysis of the tokens and structure.

Here are some suggestions for reading programs (and other formal languages).
First, remember that formal languages are much more dense than natural
languages, so it takes longer to read them. Also, the structure is very
important, so it is usually not a good idea to read from top to bottom, left to
right. Instead, learn to parse the program in your head, identifying the tokens
and interpreting the structure.  Finally, the details matter. Little things
like spelling errors and bad punctuation, which you can get away with in
natural languages, can make a big difference in a formal language.

## Programming languages

Programming languages are formal languages that have been designed to
express computations.

Tokens are the basic elements of the language, such as words, numbers, parentheses,
commas, and so on. 

Traditionally, the first program written in a new language is called *Hello,
World!* because all it does is display the words, Hello, World!  In Python, the script
looks like this:

```
print("Hello World!")
```

The script has six tokens: 
1. a function name: ```print``` 
2. an open parenthesis (round bracket): ```(```
3. a string: ```"Hello World!"```
4. a close parenthesis: ```)```.

If we change the two parentheses around to say ```print)"Hello World!"(
``` our statement would still
have five legal and valid tokens, but the structure is illegal.

When you read a sentence in English or a statement in a formal language, you
have to figure out what the structure of the sentence is (although in a natural
language you do this subconsciously). This process is called **parsing**.

The pram is an example of using the **print function**, which displays a value on the screen.

The quotation marks in the program mark the beginning and end of the value;
they do not appear in the result.
