+++
title = "Programs"
weight = 102
+++

A **program** is a sequence of instructions that specifies how to perform a
computation. The computation might be something mathematical, such as solving a
system of equations or finding the roots of a polynomial, but it can also be a
symbolic computation, such as searching and replacing text in a document.

The details look different in different languages, but a few basic instructions
appear in just about every language:

1. *input*. Get data from the keyboard, a file, or some other device.
2. *output*. Display data on the screen or send data to a file or other device.
3. *math*. Perform basic mathematical operations like addition and multiplication.
4. *conditional execution*. Check for certain conditions and execute the appropriate sequence of
statements.
5. *repetition*. Perform some action repeatedly, usually with some variation.

Every program written, no matter how complicated, is made up of instructions like these. 
Thus, we can describe programming as the process of
breaking a large, complex task into smaller and smaller subtasks until the
subtasks are simple enough to be performed with sequences of these basic
instructions.

Programming is a complex process, and because it is done by human beings, it
often leads to errors. Programming errors are called
**bugs** and the process of tracking them down and correcting them is called
**debugging**.  
<!-- Use of the term *bug* to describe small engineering difficulties
dates back to at least 1889, when Thomas Edison had a bug with his phonograph. -->

## Programming Errors

Three kinds of errors can occur in a program: **syntax errors**, **runtime errors**,
and **semantic errors**.  It is useful to
distinguish between them to track them down quicker.

### Syntax Errors

Python can only execute a program if the program is syntactically correct;
otherwise, the process fails and returns an error message.  **Syntax** refers
to the structure of a program and the rules about that structure. For example,
in English, a sentence must begin with a capital letter and end with a period.
this sentence contains a **syntax error**. 

For most humans, a few syntax errors are not a significant problem, which is
why we can read the above sentences and still figure out what they mean.
Python is not so forgiving. If there is a single syntax error anywhere in your
program, Python will display an error message and quit, and you will not be able
to run your program. During the first few weeks of your programming career, you
will probably spend a lot of time tracking down syntax errors. As you gain
experience, though, you will make fewer errors and find them faster.

### Runtime Errors

The second type of error is a runtime error. Runtime errors appear until you run the program. 
These errors are also called
**exceptions** because they usually indicate that something exceptional (and
bad) has happened.

Runtime errors are rare in the simple programs you will see in the first few
chapters, so it might be a while before you encounter one.

### Semantic Errors

The third type of error is the **semantic error**. If there is a semantic error
in your program, it will run successfully, in the sense that the computer will
not generate any error messages, but it will not do the right thing. It will do
something else. Specifically, it will do what you told it to do.

**The problem is that the program you wrote is not the program you wanted to
write.** The meaning of the program (its semantics) is wrong.  Identifying
semantic errors can be tricky because it requires you to work backward by
looking at the output of the program and trying to figure out what it is doing.

## Debugging

The process of correcting errors in a program is called **debugging**.

One of the most important skills you will acquire is debugging.  Although it
can be frustrating, debugging is one of the most intellectually rich,
challenging, and interesting parts of programming.

In some ways, debugging is like detective work. You are confronted with clues,
and you have to infer the processes and events that led to the results you see.

Debugging is also like an experimental science. Once you have an idea of what is
going wrong, you modify your program and try again. If your hypothesis is
correct, then you can predict the result of the modification, and you take a
step closer to a working program. If your hypothesis is wrong, you have to
come up with a new one. 

## Comments

As programs get bigger and more complicated, they get more difficult to read.
Formal languages are dense, and it is often difficult to look at a piece of
code and figure out what it is doing, or why.

For this reason, it is a good idea to add notes to your programs to explain in
natural language what the program is doing.

A **comment** in a computer program is a text that is intended
only for the human reader. Comments are ignored by the interpreter.

In Python, the <cite>#</cite> token starts a comment.  The rest of the line
is ignored.   Here is a new version of *Hello, World!*.

```
#---------------------------------------------------
# This demo program shows off how elegant Python is!
# Written by Joe Soap, December 2010.
# Anyone may freely copy or modify this program.
#---------------------------------------------------

print("Hello, World!")     # Isn't this easy!

```

You will also notice that we left a blank line in the program.  Blank lines
are also ignored by the interpreter, but comments and blank lines can make your
programs much easier for humans to parse.  Use them!