+++
title = "Formal and natural languages"
weight = 108
+++

**Natural languages** are the languages that people speak, such as English,
Spanish, and French. They were not designed by people (although people try to
impose some order on them); they evolved naturally.

**Formal languages** are languages that are designed by people for specific
applications. For example, the notation that mathematicians use is a formal
language that is particularly good at denoting relationships among numbers and
symbols. Chemists use a formal language to represent the chemical structure of
molecules. And most importantly:

*Programming languages are formal languages that have been designed to
express computations.*
Formal languages tend to have strict rules about syntax. For example, ```3+3=6```
is a syntactically correct mathematical statement, but ```3=+6``` is not.
H~2~O is a syntactically correct chemical name, but ~2~Zz is
not.

Syntax rules come in two flavors, pertaining to **tokens** and structure.
Tokens are the basic elements of the language, such as words, numbers, parentheses,
commas, and so on. In Python, a statement like

``` print("Happy New Year") ```

has 6 tokens: a function name, an open parenthesis (round bracket), a string, a comma, a number, and a close parenthesis.

It is possible to make errors in the way one constructs tokens.
One of the problems with ```3=+6``` is that ```$`````` is not a
legal token in mathematics (at least as far as we know). Similarly,
~2 Zz is not a legal token in chemistry notation because there is no element with the abbreviation
Zz.

The second type of syntax rule pertains to the **structure** of a statement&#8212; that
is, the way the tokens are arranged. The statement ```3=+6`````` is structurally
illegal because you can&#8217;t place a plus sign immediately after an equal sign.
Similarly, molecular formulas have to have subscripts after the element name,
not before.  And in our Python example, if we omitted the comma, or if we changed the two
parentheses around to say

```
print)"Happy New Year!"( 
```

our statement would still
have six legal and valid tokens, but the structure is illegal.

When you read a sentence in English or a statement in a formal language, you
have to figure out what the structure of the sentence is (although in a natural
language you do this subconsciously). This process is called **parsing**.

For example, when you hear the sentence, &#8220;The other shoe fell&#8221;, you understand
that the other shoe is the subject and fell is the verb.  Once you have parsed
a sentence, you can figure out what it means, or the **semantics** of the sentence.
Assuming that you know what a shoe is and what it means to fall, you will
understand the general implication of this sentence.

Although formal and natural languages have many features in common &#8212; tokens,
structure, syntax, and semantics &#8212; there are many differences:

1. ambiguity

Natural languages are full of ambiguity, which people deal with by
using contextual clues and other information. Formal languages are
designed to be nearly or completely unambiguous, which means that any
statement has exactly one meaning, regardless of context.

2. redundancy

In order to make up for ambiguity and reduce misunderstandings, natural
languages employ lots of redundancy. As a result, they are often
verbose.  Formal languages are less redundant and more concise.

3. literalness

Formal languages mean exactly what they say.  On the other hand, natural languages
are full of idiom and metaphor. If someone says, &#8220;The
other shoe fell&#8221;, there is probably no shoe and nothing falling.
You&#8217;ll need to find the
original joke to understand the idiomatic meaning of the other shoe falling.

The meaning of a computer program is unambiguous and literal, and can
be understood entirely by analysis of the tokens and structure.

Here are some suggestions for reading programs (and other formal languages).
First, remember that formal languages are much more dense than natural
languages, so it takes longer to read them. Also, the structure is very
important, so it is usually not a good idea to read from top to bottom, left to
right. Instead, learn to parse the program in your head, identifying the tokens
and interpreting the structure.  Finally, the details matter. Little things
like spelling errors and bad punctuation, which you can get away with in
natural languages, can make a big difference in a formal language.

## The first program

Traditionally, the first program written in a new language is called *Hello,
World!* because all it does is display the words, Hello, World!  In Python, the script
looks like this:

```
print("Hello World!")
```

This is an example of using the **print function**, which doesn&#8217;t actually print
anything on paper. It displays a value on the screen. In this case, the result shown
is Hello, World!.

The quotation marks in the program mark the beginning and end of the value;
they don&#8217;t appear in the result.

Some people judge the quality of a programming language by the simplicity of
the Hello, World! program. By this standard, Python does about as well as
possible.