+++
title = "The ``in`` and ``not in`` operators"
weight = 707
+++

The ``in`` operator tests for membership. When both of the arguments to ``in``
are strings, ``in`` checks whether the left argument is a substring of the right
argument.

```
>>> "p" in "apple"
True
>>> "i" in "apple"
False
>>> "ap" in "apple"
True
>>> "pa" in "apple"
False
```

Note that a string is a substring of itself, and the empty string is a 
substring of any other string. (Also note that computer scientists 
like to think about these edge cases quite carefully!) 

```
>>> "a" in "a"
True
>>> "apple" in "apple"
True
>>> "" in "a"
True
>>> "" in "apple"
True
```
    
The ``not in`` operator returns the logical opposite results of ``in``: 

```
>>> "x" not in "apple"
True
```

Combining the ``in`` operator with string concatenation using ``+``, we can
write a function that removes all the vowels from a string:

```
def remove_vowels(s):
    vowels = "aeiouAEIOU"
    s_sans_vowels = ""
    for x in s:
        if x not in vowels:
            s_sans_vowels += x
    return s_sans_vowels 
           
test(remove_vowels("compsci") == "cmpsc")
test(remove_vowels("aAbEefIijOopUus") == "bfjps")
```

## A ``find`` function

What does the following function do?

```
def find(strng, ch):
    """
    Find and return the index of ch in strng.  
    Return -1 if ch does not occur in strng.
    """
    ix = 0
    while ix < len(strng):
        if strng[ix] == ch:
            return ix
        ix += 1
    return -1
            
test(find("Compsci", "p") == 3)
test(find("Compsci", "C") == 0)
test(find("Compsci", "i") == 6)
test(find("Compsci", "x") == -1)
```    

In a sense, ``find`` is the opposite of the indexing operator. Instead of taking
an index and extracting the corresponding character, it takes a character and
finds the index where that character appears. If the character is not found,
the function returns ``-1``.

This is another example where we see a ``return`` statement inside a loop.
If ``strng[ix] == ch``, the function returns immediately, breaking out of
the loop prematurely.

If the character doesn't appear in the string, then the program exits the loop
normally and returns ``-1``.

This pattern of computation is sometimes called a **eureka traversal** or
**short-circuit evaluation**,  because as soon as we find what we are looking for, 
we can cry "Eureka!", take the short-circuit, and stop looking.