+++
title = "Looping and counting"
weight = 708
+++

The following program counts the number of times the letter ``a`` appears in a
string, and is another example of the counter pattern introduced in
:ref:`counting`:

    .. sourcecode:: python3
        :linenos:
        
        def count_a(text): 
            count = 0
            for c in text:
                if c == "a":
                    count += 1
            return(count)

        test(count_a("banana") == 3)    

.. index:: optional parameter, default value, parameter; optional

.. _optional_parameters:

Optional parameters
-------------------

To find the locations of the second or third occurrence of a character in a
string, we can modify the ``find`` function, adding a third parameter for the
starting position in the search string:

    .. sourcecode:: python3
        :linenos:
        
        def find2(strng, ch, start):
            ix = start 
            while ix < len(strng):
                if strng[ix] == ch:
                    return ix
                ix += 1
            return -1
            
        test(find2("banana", "a", 2) == 3)

The call ``find2("banana", "a", 2)`` now returns ``3``, the index of the first
occurrence of "a" in "banana" starting the search at index 2. What does
``find2("banana", "n", 3)`` return? If you said, 4, there is a good chance you
understand how ``find2`` works.

Better still, we can combine ``find`` and ``find2`` using an
**optional parameter**:

    .. sourcecode:: python3
        :linenos:
        
        def find(strng, ch, start=0):
            ix = start 
            while ix < len(strng):
                if strng[ix] == ch:
                    return ix
                ix += 1
            return -1

When a function has an optional parameter, the caller `may` provide a 
matching argument. If the third argument is provided to ``find``, it gets assigned 
to ``start``.  But if the caller leaves the argument out, then start is given
a default value indicated by the assignment ``start=0`` in the function definition.
 
So the call ``find("banana", "a", 2)`` to this version of ``find`` behaves just
like ``find2``, while in the call ``find("banana", "a")``, ``start`` will be
set to the **default value** of ``0``.

Adding another optional parameter to ``find`` makes it search from a starting
position, up to but not including the end position:

    .. sourcecode:: python3
        :linenos:
        
        def find(strng, ch, start=0, end=None):
            ix = start 
            if end is None:
               end = len(strng)
            while ix < end:
                if strng[ix] == ch:
                    return ix
                ix += 1 
            return -1

The optional value for ``end`` is interesting: we give it a default value ``None`` if the
caller does not supply any argument.  In the body of the function we test what ``end`` is,
and if the caller did not supply any argument, we reassign ``end`` to be the length of the string.
If the caller has supplied an argument for ``end``, however, the caller's value will be used in the loop.

The semantics of ``start`` and ``end`` in this function are precisely the same as they are in
the ``range`` function.

Here are some test cases that should pass:  

```
ss = "Python strings have some interesting methods."
test(find(ss, "s") == 7)
test(find(ss, "s", 7) == 7)
test(find(ss, "s", 8) == 13)
test(find(ss, "s", 8, 13) == -1)
test(find(ss, ".") == len(ss)-1)
```