+++
title = "Tables"
weight = 601
+++

One of the things loops are good for is generating tables.  Before
computers were readily available, people had to calculate logarithms, sines and
cosines, and other mathematical functions by hand. To make that easier,
mathematics books contained long tables listing the values of these functions.
Creating the tables was slow and boring, and they tended to be full of errors.

When computers appeared on the scene, one of the initial reactions was, *&#8220;This is
great! We can use the computers to generate the tables, so there will be no
errors.&#8221;* That turned out to be true (mostly) but shortsighted. Soon thereafter,
computers and calculators were so pervasive that the tables became obsolete.

Well, almost. For some operations, computers use tables of values to get an
approximate answer and then perform computations to improve the approximation.
In some cases, there have been errors in the underlying tables, most famously
in the table the Intel Pentium processor chip used to perform floating-point division.

Although a log table is not as useful as it once was, it still makes a good
example of iteration. The following program outputs a sequence of values in the
left column and 2 raised to the power of that value in the right column:

```
for x in range(13):   # Generate numbers 0 to 12
    print(str(x)+"\t"+str(2**x))
```


The string ```"\t"``` represents a **tab character**. The backslash character in
```"\t"``` indicates the beginning of an **escape sequence**.  Escape sequences
are used to represent invisible characters like tabs and newlines. The sequence
```\n``` represents a **newline**.

An escape sequence can appear anywhere in a string; in this example, the tab
escape sequence is the only thing in the string. How do you think you represent
a backslash in a string?

As characters and strings are displayed on the screen, an invisible marker
called the **cursor** keeps track of where the next character will go. After a
```print``` function, the cursor normally goes to the beginning of the next
line.

The tab character shifts the cursor to the right until it reaches one of the
tab stops. Tabs are useful for making columns of text line up, as in the output
of the previous program. Because of the tab characters between the columns, the position of the second
column does not depend on the number of digits in the first column.


