+++
title = "Two Dimensional Tables"
weight = 602
+++

A two-dimensional table is a table where you read the value at the intersection
of a row and a column. A multiplication table is a good example. Let&#8217;s say you
want to print a multiplication table for the values from 1 to 6.

A good way to start is to write a loop that prints the multiples of 2, all on
one line:

```
for i in range(1, 7):
    print(2 * i, end="   ")
print()
```

Here we&#8217;ve used the ```range``` function, but made it start its sequence at 1.
As the loop executes, the value of ```i``` changes from 1 to 6. 
When all the elements of the range have been assigned to ```i```, the loop terminates.
Each time through the loop, it
displays the value of ```2 * i```, followed by three spaces.

Again, the extra ```end="    "``` argument in the ```print``` function suppresses the newline, and
uses three spaces instead.  After the
loop completes, the call to ```print``` at line 3 finishes the current line, and starts a new line.

## Encapsulation and generalization

Encapsulation is the process of wrapping a piece of code in a function,
allowing you to take advantage of all the things functions are good for.

Generalization means taking something specific, such as printing the multiples
of 2, and making it more general, such as printing the multiples of any
integer.

This function encapsulates the previous loop and generalizes it to print
multiples of ```n```:

```
def print_multiples(n):
    for i in range(1, 7):
        print(n * i, end="   ")
    print()

print_multiples(2)
print_multiples(3)
print_multiples(4)
```

To encapsulate, all we had to do was add the first line, which declares the
name of the function and the parameter list. To generalize, all we had to do
was replace the value 2 with the parameter ```n```.

By now you can probably guess how to print a multiplication table &#8212; by
calling ```print_multiples``` repeatedly with different arguments. In fact, we
can use another loop:

```
def print_multiples(n):
    for i in range(1, 7):
        print(n * i, end="   ")
    print()

for i in range(1, 7):
    print_multiples(i)</textarea>
```

Notice how similar this loop is to the one inside ```print_multiples```.  All we
did was replace the ```print``` function with a function call. The output of this program is a multiplication table.

## More encapsulation

To demonstrate encapsulation again, let&#8217;s take the code from the last section
and wrap it up in a function:


```
def print_multiples(n):
    for i in range(1, 7):
        print(n * i, end="   ")
    print()

def print_mult_table():
    for i in range(1, 7):
        print_multiples(i)

print_mult_table()
```

This process is a common **development plan**. We develop code by writing lines
of code outside any function, or typing them in to the interpreter. When we get
the code working, we extract it and wrap it up in a function.

This development plan is particularly useful if you don&#8217;t know how to divide
the program into functions when you start writing. This approach lets you
design as you go along.
