+++
title = "The while statement"
weight = 604
+++

Here is a fragment of code that demonstrates the use of the ```while``` statement:

```
def sum_to(n):
    """ Return the sum of 1+2+3+...+n """
    ss  = 0
    v = 1
    while v <= n:
        ss = ss + v
        v = v + 1
    return ss

# For your test suite
print(sum_to(4))
print(sum_to(1000))</textarea>
```


You can almost read the ```while``` statement as if it were English. It means,
while ```v``` is less than or equal to ```n```, continue executing the body of the loop. Within
the body, each time, increment ```v```. When ```v``` passes ```n```, return your accumulated sum.

More formally, here is precise flow of execution for a ```while``` statement:

<ul class="simple">
<li>Evaluate the condition at line 5, yielding a value which is either ```False``` or ```True```.</li>
<li>If the value is ```False```, exit the ```while``` statement and continue
execution at the next statement (line 8 in this case).</li>
<li>If the value is ```True```, execute each of the statements in the body (lines 6 and 7) and
then go back to the ```while``` statement at line 5.</li>
</ul>
The body consists of all of the statements indented below the ```while``` keyword.

Notice that if the loop condition is ```False``` the first time we get
loop, the statements in the body of the loop are never executed.

The body of the loop should change the value of one or more variables so that
eventually the condition becomes false and the loop terminates. Otherwise the
loop will repeat forever, which is called an **infinite loop**. An endless
source of amusement for computer scientists is the observation that the
directions on shampoo, &#8220;lather, rinse, repeat&#8221;, are an infinite loop.

In the case here, we can prove that the loop terminates because we
know that the value of ```n``` is finite, and we can see that the value of ```v```
increments each time through the loop, so eventually it will have to exceed ```n```. In
other cases, it is not so easy, even impossible in some cases,
to tell if the loop will ever terminate.

What you will notice here is that the ```while``` loop is more work for
you &#8212; the programmer &#8212; than the equivalent ```for``` loop.  When using a ```while```
loop one has to manage the loop variable yourself: give it an initial value, test
for completion, and then make sure you change something in the body so that the loop
terminates.  By comparison, here is an equivalent function that uses ```for``` instead:

```
def sum_to(n):
    """ Return the sum of 1+2+3+...+n """
    ss  = 0
    for v in range(n+1):
        ss = ss + v
    return ss

print(sum_to(4))
print(sum_to(1000))</textarea>
```

Notice the slightly tricky call to the ```range``` function &#8212; we had to add one onto ```n```,
because ```range``` generates its list up to but excluding the value you give it.
It would be easy to make a programming mistake and overlook this, but because we&#8217;ve
made the investment of writing some unit tests, our test suite would have caught our error.

So why have two kinds of loop if ```for``` looks easier?  This next example shows a case where
we need the extra power that we get from the ```while``` loop.

