+++
title = "Updating variables"
weight = 502
+++

When an assignment statement is executed, First, the right-hand side expression that is the
expression that comes after the assignment token is evaluated.  The evaluation produces a value.
Then the assignment is made, so that the variable on the left-hand side now refers
to the new value.

One of the most common forms of assignment is an *update*, where the new
value of the variable depends on its old value.   Deduct 40 cents from
my airtime balance, or add one run to the scoreboard.

Let's analyze the code below.
```
n = 5
n = 3 * n + 1
print(n)
```

Line 1 creates a variable named ```n``` and initializes with the value ```5```.

Line 2 means *get the current value of n, multiply it by three and, then, add
one, and assign the answer to n, thus making n refer to the value*.
So after executing the two lines above, ```n``` will point/refer to the
integer 16.

If you try to get the value of a variable that has never been assigned to, you&#8217;ll get an error:

```
>>> w = x + 1
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<pyshell#0>", line 1, in &lt;module>
    w=x+1
NameError: name &#39;x&#39; is not defined
```

Before you can update a variable, you have to **initialize** it to some starting value,
usually with a simple assignment:

```
runs_scored = 0
...
runs_scored = runs_scored + 1
```

This sort of assignment that updates a variable by adding 1 to it is very common.
It is called an **increment** of the variable; subtracting 1 is called a **decrement**.
Sometimes programmers also talk about *bumping* a variable, which means the same
as incrementing it by 1.

