+++
title = "The for loop revisited"
weight = 503
+++

Recall that the ```for``` loop processes each item in a list.  Each item in
turn is (re-)assigned to the loop variable, and the body of the loop is executed.
We saw this example in an earlier chapter:

```
for f in ["Joe", "Zoe", "Brad", "Angelina", "Zuki", "Thandi", "Paris"]:
    invitation = "Hi " + f + ".  Please come to my party on Saturday!"
    print(invitation)
```

Running through all the items in a list is called **traversing** the list,
or **traversal**.

Let us write a function now, to sum up all the elements in a list of numbers.
Do this by hand first, and try to isolate exactly what steps you take.  You will
find you need to keep some running total of the sum so far, either on a piece
of paper, in your head, or on a calculator. Remembering things from one step to the next is
precisely why we have variables in a program: so we will need some variable
to remember the running total.  It should be initialized with a value of zero,
and then we need to traverse the items in the list.  For each item, we will want
to update the running total by adding the next number to it.

```
def mysum(xs):
    """ Sum all the numbers in the list xs, and return the total. """
    running_total = 0
    for x in xs:
       running_total = running_total + x
    return running_total

# Add tests like these to your test suite ...
print(mysum([1, 2, 3, 4])) # should be 10
print(mysum([1.25, 2.5, 1.75])) # should be 5.5
print(mysum([1, -2, 3])) # should be 2
print(mysum([ ])) # should be 0
print(mysum(range(11))) # should be 0+1+2+...+10 = 55
```

*Exercise 1* Write a Python program that calculates the product of the elements of a list.

*Exercise 2* Write a Python program that calculates the sum of squares of the elements of a list.

*Exercise 3* Write a program to count how many odd numbers are in a list.

*Exercise 4* Sum up all the even numbers in a list.

*Exercise 5* Sum up all the negative numbers in a list.

*Exercise 6* Count how many words in a list have length 5.
