+++
title = "The Collatz 3n + 1 sequence"
weight = 505
+++


So why have two kinds of loops if ```for``` looks easier?  This next example shows a case where
we need the extra power that we get from the ```while``` loop.

Let's look at a simple sequence that has fascinated mathematicians for many years.
The rule for creating the sequence is to start from
some given ```n```, and to generate
the next term of the sequence from ```n```, either by halving ```n```
(whenever ```n``` is even), or else by multiplying it by three and adding 1 (whenever ```n``` is odd).  The sequence
terminates when ```n``` reaches 1.

This Python function captures that algorithm:

```
def seq_3n_plus_1(n):
    """ Print the 3n+1 sequence from n,
        terminating when it reaches 1.
    """
    while n != 1:
        print(n, end=", ")
        if n % 2 == 0:        # n is even
            n = n // 2
        else:                 # n is odd
            n = n * 3 + 1
    print(n, end=".\n")

seq_3n_plus_1(3)
seq_3n_plus_1(19)
```


Notice first that the print function on line 6 has an extra argument ```end = ","```.  This
tells the ```print``` function to follow the printed string with whatever the programmer
chooses (in this case, a comma followed by a space), instead of ending the line. So
each time something is printed in the loop, it is printed on the same output line, with
the numbers separated by commas.  The call to ```print(n, end=".\n")``` at line 11 after the loop terminates
will then print the final value of ```n``` followed by a period and a newline character.
(You will cover the newline character, ```\n```, in a later chapter).

The condition for continuing with this loop is ```n != 1```, so the loop will continue running until
it reaches its termination condition, (i.e. ```n == 1```).

Each time through the loop, the program outputs the value of ```n``` and then
checks whether it is even or odd. If it is even, the value of ```n``` is divided
by 2 using integer division. If it is odd, the value is replaced by ```n * 3 + 1```.  Try some examples to see how the sequence behaves for different inputs.

Since ```n``` sometimes increases and sometimes decreases, there is no obvious
proof that ```n``` will ever reach 1, or that the program terminates. For some
particular values of ```n```, we can prove termination. For example, if the
starting value is a power of two, then the value of ```n``` will be even each
time through the loop until it reaches 1. The previous example ends with such a
sequence, starting with 16.

See if you can find a small starting
number that needs more than a hundred steps before it terminates.

Particular values aside, the interesting question was first posed by a German
mathematician called Lothar Collatz: the *Collatz conjecture* (also known as
the *3n + 1 conjecture*), is that this sequence terminates for *all* positive
values of ```n```.  So far, no one has been able to prove it *or* disprove it!
(A conjecture is a statement that might be true, but nobody knows for sure.)

Think carefully about what would be needed for a proof or disproof of the conjecture
*&#8220;All positive integers will eventually converge to 1 using the Collatz rules&#8221;*.
With fast computers we have been able to test every integer up to very
large values, and so far, they have all eventually ended up at 1.
But who knows? Perhaps there is some as-yet untested number which does not reduce to 1.

You&#8217;ll notice that if you don&#8217;t stop when you reach 1, the sequence gets into
its own cyclic loop:  1, 4, 2, 1, 4, 2, 1, 4 ...   So one possibility is that there might
be other cycles that we just haven&#8217;t found yet.

Wikipedia has an informative article about the Collatz conjecture. There&#8217;s also a humorous take on the Collatz conjecture at <a class="reference external" href="http://imgs.xkcd.com/comics/collatz_conjecture.png">http://imgs.xkcd.com/comics/collatz_conjecture.png</a>. The sequence
also goes under other names (Hailstone sequence, Wonderous numbers, etc.),
and you&#8217;ll find out just how many integers have already been tested by computer,
and found to converge!

