+++
title = "Choosing between for and while"
weight = 506
+++


Use a ```for``` loop if you know the maximum number of times that the body will execute.
For example, if you are traversing a list of elements, you know that the maximum
number of loop iterations is given by all the elements in the list.
Or if you need to print the 12 times table, we know right away how many times
the loop will need to run.

So any problem like iterating a weather model for 1000 cycles, searching a given
list of words, or finding all prime numbers up to 10000 suggest that a ```for``` loop is best.

By contrast, if you are required to repeat some computation until some condition is
met, and you cannot calculate in advance when or if this will happen,
as we did in this 3n + 1 problem, you will need a ```while``` loop.

When we know ahead of time some definite bounds for what is needed we call the iteration 
a **definite iteration** and we use a ```for``` loop.  Otherwise, when we cannot establish
an upper bound, we call the iteration an **indefinite iteration** and we use a ```while```
loop.

*Exercise 1* Write a Python program that calculates the product of the elements of a list.

*Exercise 2* Write a Python program that calculates the sum of squares of the elements of a list.

*Exercise 3* Write a program to count how many odd numbers are in a list.

*Exercise 4* Sum up all the even numbers in a list.

*Exercise 5* Sum up all the negative numbers in a list.

*Exercise 6* Count how many words in a list have length 5.