+++
title = "Exercises"
weight = 511
+++

*Exercise 1* Write a Python program that calculates the product of the elements of a list.

*Exercise 2* Write a Python program that calculates the sum of squares of the elements of a list.

*Exercise 3* Write a program to count how many odd numbers are in a list.

*Exercise 4* Write a program that sums up all the even numbers in a list.

*Exercise 5* Write a program that sums up all the negative numbers in a list.

*Exercise 6* Write a program to count how many words in a list have length 5.

*Exercise 7* If you were going to draw a regular polygon with 18 sides, what angle would you need to turn the turtle at each
corner?

*Exercise 8*  At the interactive prompt, anticipate what each of the following lines will do, and then record what happens.
Score yourself, giving yourself one point for each one you anticipate correctly:

```
>>> import turtle
>>> window = turtle.Screen()
>>> tess = turtle.Turtle()
>>> tess.right(90)
>>> tess.left(3600)
>>> tess.right(-90)
>>> tess.speed(10)
>>> tess.left(3600)
>>> tess.speed(0)
>>> tess.left(3645)
>>> tess.forward(-100)
```

*Exercise 9* Count how many words occur in a list up to and including the first occurrence of the word “sam”. (What if
“sam” does not occur?)

*Exercise 10* Write a program that prints `````True``` when ```n``` is a prime number and ```False``` otherwise.

*Exercise 11* Write a program that prints `````True``` when ```n``` is a palindrom and ```False``` otherwise.

You may use the following algorithm to calculate the mirror image of a number.

```
1. Initialize mirror to 0.
2. while n is not 0
    2.1. digit = n % 10
    2.2. mirror = mirror * 10 + digit
    2.3. n = n//10
```

*Exercise 12* Write a program that counts the number of even digits in n.

