+++
title = "Function"
weight = 701
+++


In Python, a function is a named sequence of statements that belong together. Their primary purpose is to help us organize programs into chunks that match how we think about the problem.

The syntax for a function definition is:
```
def NAME( PARAMETERS ):
    STATEMENTS
```

We can make up any names we want for the functions we create, except that we cannot use a name that is a Python keyword, and the names must follow the rules for legal identifiers. By convention, we like to use all lowercase for function names, with words separated by underscores, such as ```draw_square```.

There can be any number of statements inside the function, but they have to be **indented** from the ```def```. In the examples in this book, we will use the standard indentation of four spaces. Function definitions are the second of several compound statements we will see, all of which have the same pattern:

A **header line**, which begins with a keyword and ends with a colon.

A **body** consisting of one or more Python statements, each indented the same amount — we strongly recommend 4 spaces — from the header line. 

We have already seen the for loop which follows this pattern.

So looking again at the function definition, the keyword in the header is ```def``, which is followed by the name of the function and some parameters enclosed in parentheses. The parameter list may be empty, or it may contain any number of parameters separated from one another by commas. In either case, the parentheses are required. The parameters specify what information, if any, we have to provide to use the new function.

Suppose we are working with turtles, and a common operation we need is to draw squares. “Draw a square” is an abstraction, a mental chunk, or several smaller steps. So let’s write a function to capture the pattern of this “building block”:

```
import turtle

def draw_square(t, sz):
    """Make turtle t draw a square of sz."""
    for i in range(4):
        t.forward(sz)
        t.left(90)

turtle.clearscreen() 
turtle.setup(200,200)
turtle.bgcolor("lightgreen")    # Set the background color

alex = turtle.Turtle()      # Create alex
4
draw_square(alex, 50)       # Call the function to draw the square

turtle.mainloop() 
```

This function is named ```draw_square``. It has two parameters: one to tell the function which turtle to move around, and the other to tell it the size of the square we want drawn. Make sure you know where the body of the function ends — it depends on the indentation, and the blank lines do not count for this purpose!

## Docstrings for documentation

If the first thing after the function header is a string, it is treated as a docstring and gets special treatment in Python. For example, when we type ```help('funcname')``` in the Python interpreter (where “funcname” is the name of the function), we get a message telling us what arguments the function takes, and it shows us any other text contained in the docstring. For example, type help('print') in the Python interpreter and read the message that you get.

Docstrings are the key way to document our functions in Python and the documentation part is important. Because whoever calls our function shouldn’t have to need to know what is going on in the function or how it works; they just need to know what arguments our function takes, what it does, and what the expected result is. Enough to be able to use the function without having to look underneath. 

Docstrings are usually formed using triple-quoted strings as they allow us to easily expand the docstring.

Just to differentiate from comments, a string at the start of a function (a docstring) is retrievable by Python tools at runtime. By contrast, comments are eliminated when the program is parsed.

Defining a new function does not make the function run. To do that we need a function call. We have already seen how to call some built-in functions like print, range and int. Function calls contain the name of the function being executed followed by a list of values, called arguments, which are assigned to the parameters in the function definition. So in line 14 of the program above, we call the function, and pass ```alex``` as the turtle to be manipulated, and ```50``` as the size of the square we want. While the function is executing, then, the variable ```sz``` refers to the value ```50```, and the variable ```t``` refers to the same turtle instance that the variable ```alex``` refers to.

Once we have defined a function, we can call it as often as we like, and its statements will be executed each time we call it. And we could use it to get any of our turtles to draw a square. In the next example, we have changed the ```draw_square``` function a little, and we get ```tess``` to draw 15 squares, with some variations.

````
import turtle

def draw_multicolor_square(t, sz):
    """Make turtle t draw a multi-color square of sz."""

    for i in ["red", "purple", "hotpink", "blue"]:
        t.color(i)
        t.forward(sz)
        t.left(90)

turtle.clearscreen() 
turtle.setup(200,200)
turtle.bgcolor("lightgreen")    # Set the background color

tess = turtle.Turtle()      # Create tess and set some attributes
tess.pensize(3)
size = 20                   # Size of the smallest square
for i in range(15):
    draw_multicolor_square(tess, size)
    size = size + 10        # Increase the size for next time
    tess.forward(10)        # Move tess along a little
    tess.right(18)          #    and give her some turn

turtle.mainloop() 
```
