+++
title = "Functions call functions"
weight = 702
+++

Let’s assume now we want a function to draw a rectangle. We need to be able to call the function with different arguments for width and height. And, unlike the case of the square, we cannot repeat the same thing 4 times, because the four sides are not equal.

So we eventually came up with this rather nice code that can draw a rectangle.

```
def draw_rectangle(t, w, h):
    """Get turtle t to draw a rectangle of width w and height h."""
    for i in range(2):
        t.forward(w)
        t.left(90)
        t.forward(h)
        t.left(90)
```

The parameter names are deliberately chosen as single letters to ensure they are not misunderstood. In real programs, once we have had more experience, we will insist on better variable names than this. But the point is that the program does not “understand” that we’re drawing a rectangle, or that the parameters represent the width and the height. Concepts like rectangle, width, and height are the meanings we humans have, not concepts that the program or the computer understands.

Thinking like a computer scientist involves looking for patterns and relationships. In the code above, we have done that to some extent. We did not just draw four sides. Instead, we spotted that we could draw the rectangle as two halves, and used a loop to repeat that pattern twice.

But now we might spot that a square is a special kind of rectangle. We already have a function that draws a rectangle, so we can use that to draw our square.

```
def draw_square(tx, sz):        # A new version of draw_square
    draw_rectangle(tx, sz, sz)
```

There are some points worth noting here:

Functions can call other functions.

Rewriting draw_square like this captures the relationship that we’ve spotted between squares and rectangles.

A caller of this function might say ```draw_square(tess, 50)```. The parameters of this function, ```tx``` and ```sz```, are assigned the values of the ```tess``` object, and the ```int 50``` respectively.

In the body of the function they are just like any other variable.

When the call is made to ```draw_rectangle```, the values in variables ```tx``` and ```sz``` are fetched first, then the call happens. So as we enter the top of function ```draw_rectangle```, its variable ```t``` is assigned the ```tess``` object, and ```w``` and ```h``` in that function are both given the value ```50```.

So far, it may not be clear why it is worth the trouble to create all of these new functions. Actually, there are a lot of reasons, but this example demonstrates two:

Creating a new function allows us to name a group of statements. Functions can simplify a program by hiding a complex computation behind a single command. The function (including its name) can capture our mental chunking, or abstraction, of the problem.
Creating a new function can make a program smaller by eliminating repetitive code.
As we might expect, we have to create a function before we can execute it. In other words, the function definition has to be executed before the function is called.