+++
title = "Turtles!"
weight = 303
+++

## A bale of turtles

Just like we can have many different integers in a program, we can have many turtles.
Each of them is called an **instance**.  Each instance has its own attributes and
methods &#8212; so ```alex``` might draw with a thin black pen and be at some position,
while ```tess``` might be going in her own direction with a thick pink pen.

```
import ColabTurtlePlus.Turtle as turtle

turtle.clearscreen() 
turtle.setup(200,200)
turtle.bgcolor("lightgreen")
# Create tess and set some attributes
tess = turtle.Turtle()       
tess.color("hotpink")
tess.pensize(5)
# Create alex
alex = turtle.Turtle()       

# Make tess draw equilateral triangle
tess.forward(80)             
tess.left(120)
tess.forward(80)
tess.left(120)
tess.forward(80)
tess.left(120)               # Complete the triangle

tess.right(180)              # Turn tess around
tess.forward(80)             # Move her away from the origin

# Make alex draw a square
alex.forward(50)             
alex.left(90)
alex.forward(50)
alex.left(90)
alex.forward(50)
alex.left(90)
alex.forward(50)
alex.left(90)
```

There are 360 degrees in a full circle.  If we add up all the turns that a turtle makes,
*no matter what steps occurred between the turns*, we can easily figure out if they
add up to some multiple of 360.  This should convince us that ```alex``` is facing in
exactly the same direction as he was when he was first created. (Geometry
conventions have 0 degrees facing East, and that is the case here too!)

We could have left out the last turn for ```alex```, but if we are asked to draw a closed shape like a square or a rectangle, it is a good idea to
complete all the turns and to leave the turtle back where it started, facing the
same direction as it started in.
This makes reasoning about the program and composing chunks of code into bigger programs
easier.

We did the same with ```tess```: she drew her triangle, and turned through a full 360 degrees.
Then we turned her around and moved her aside.  

Blank and  lines are used to separate groups of movements by shape. ```tess```&#8216; movements were gr as &#8220;draw the triangle&#8221;
(lines 12-17) and then &#8220;move away from the origin&#8221; (lines 19 and 20).</li>
<li>One of the key uses for comments is to record our mental chunking, and big ideas.
They&#8217;re not always explicit in the code.</li>
<li>And, uh-huh, two turtles may not be enough for a herd. But the important idea is that the
turtle module gives us a kind of factory that lets us create as many turtles as we
need. Each instance has its own state and behavior.</li>
</ul>
