+++
title = "Boolean values and expressions!"
weight = 401
+++

## Boolean values and expressions

A *Boolean* value is either true or false.  It is named
after the British mathematician, George Boole, who first formulated *Boolean
Algebra*.
This is the basis of all modern computer logic.

In Python, the two Boolean values are ```True``` and ```False```, and the Python type is **bool**.
Remember, to find the type of a constant or variable use the function ```type```. Execution of ```type(True)``` reports ```<class "bool">```

The capitalization of ```True``` and `False` is important. Execution of ```type(true)``` reports this error:
```
>>> 
NameError  Traceback (most recent call last)
<ipython-input-1-6f4d8242c3d0> in <cell line: 1>()
----> 1 type(true)

NameError: name 'true' is not defined
```

The error tells us that the lowercase ```true``` is an unknown name in Python. 


A **Boolean expression** is an expression that evaluates to produce a result which is
a Boolean value.  For example, the operator ```==``` tests if two values are equal.
It produces (or *yields*) a Boolean value.

Consider the statement ``` 5 == (3 + 2)```. The two operands evaluate to equal values, so the expression evaluates to ```True```. 

In the statement ```5 == 6```, 5 is not equal to 6, so we get ```False```.

The ```==``` operator is one of six common **comparison operators** which all produce
a ```bool``` result; here are all six:

```
x == y               # Produce True if ... x is equal to y
x != y               #                 ... x is not equal to y
x > y                #                 ... x is greater than y
x < y                #                 ... x is less than y
x >= y               #                 ... x is greater than or equal to y
x <= y               #                 ... x is less than or equal to y
```

Although these operations are probably familiar, the Python symbols are
different from the mathematical symbols. A common error is to use a single
equal sign (```=```) instead of a double equal sign (```==```). Remember that ```=```
is an assignment operator and ```==``` is a comparison operator. Also, there is
no such thing as ```=<``` or ```=>```.

Like any other types seen so far, Boolean values can be assigned to
variables, printed, etc.

The program below outputs ```True```.
```
age = 18
oldEnoughToGetDriversLicense = age >= 16
print(oldEnoughToGetDriversLicense)
```

**Exercise 1.** Read the code below, predict what it will print when executed, and then check your understanding.

```
true = 5

print(true)
```

**Exercise 2.** Read the code below, predict what it will print when executed, and then check your understanding.

```
True = 5

print(True)
```

**Exercise 3.** Predict the value of the expressions below, and then check your answers using the Python Interpreter.

a. ```3 == 3```

b. ```3 != 3```

c. ```3 >= 4```

d. ```5%4==1```

e. ```(-5)%4==-1```

**Exercise 4**. Consider the assignments below.

```
x = 5
y = -5
z = -7
u = -5
```

Predict the value of the expressions below, and then check your answers using the Python Interpreter.

a. ```x==x```

b. ```x==y```

c. ```y==x```

d. ```y<u```

e. ```y<=u```

f. ```x=z```

**Exercise 5.** Consider the assignments below.

```
x = 3
y = -2
z = 1
```

Write two expressions that evaluate to ```True``` and two expressions that evaluate to ```False```.

**Exercise 6.** Write an expression that evaluates to ```True``` if the variable ```x``` is a multiple of ```15```.