+++
title = "Return"
weight = 406
+++

## The ```return``` statement

The ```return``` statement, with or without a value, depending on whether the
function is fruitful or void, allows us to terminate the execution of a function
before (or when) we reach the end. One reason to use an *early return* is if we detect an error
condition:

```
def print_square_root(x):
    if x <= 0:
        print("Positive numbers only, please.")
        return
    result = x**0.5
    print("The square root of "+str(x)+" is "+str(result))

print_square_root(16)
print_square_root(-4)
```

The function ```print_square_root``` has a parameter named ```x```. The first thing
it does is check whether ```x``` is less than or equal to 0, in which case it
displays an error message and then uses ```return``` to exit the function. The
flow of execution immediately returns to the caller, and the remaining lines of
the function are not executed.

## Logical opposites

Each of the six relational operators has a logical opposite: for example,
suppose we can get a driver&#8217;s licence when our age is greater or equal to 16,
we can *not* get the driver&#8217;s licence when we are less than 16.

Notice that the opposite of ```>=``` is ```<```.

<div><table border="1" class="docutils">
<colgroup>
<col width="33%" />
<col width="67%" />
</colgroup>
<thead valign="bottom">
<tr class="row-odd"><th class="head">operator</th>
<th class="head">logical opposite</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody valign="top">
<tr class="row-even"><td>==</td>
<td>!=</td>
</tr>
<tr class="row-odd"><td>!=</td>
<td>==</td>
</tr>
<tr class="row-even"><td><</td>
<td>>=</td>
</tr>
<tr class="row-odd"><td><=</td>
<td>></td>
</tr>
<tr class="row-even"><td>></td>
<td><=</td>
</tr>
<tr class="row-odd"><td>>=</td>
<td><</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>

Understanding these logical opposites allows us to sometimes get rid of ```not```
operators.  ```not``` operators are often quite difficult to read in computer code, and
our intentions will usually be clearer if we can eliminate them.

For example, if we wrote this Python:

```
if not (age >= 17):
    print("Hey, you are too young to get a driver's licence!")
```

it would probably be clearer to use the simplification laws, and to
write instead:

```
if age < 17:
    print("Hey, you are too young to get a driver's licence!")
```

Two powerful simplification laws (called de Morgan&#8217;s laws) that are often
helpful when dealing with complicated Boolean expressions are:

```
not (x and y)  ==  (not x) or (not y)
not (x or y)   ==  (not x) and (not y)
```

For example, suppose we can slay the dragon only if our magic
lightsabre sword is charged to 90% or higher,
and we have 100 or more energy units in our protective shield.
We find this fragment of Python code in the game:

```
if not ((sword_charge >= 0.90) and (shield_energy >= 100)):
    print("Your attack has no effect, the dragon fries you to a crisp!")
else:
    print("The dragon crumples in a heap. You rescue the princess!")
```


de Morgan&#8217;s laws together with the logical opposites would let us
rework the condition in a (perhaps) easier to understand way like this:

```
if (sword_charge < 0.90) or (shield_energy < 100):
    print("Your attack has no effect, the dragon fries you to a crisp!")
else:
    print("The dragon crumples in a heap. You rescue the princess!")
```

We could also get rid of the ```not``` by swapping around the ```then``` and
```else``` parts of the conditional.  So here is a third version, also equivalent:

```
if (sword_charge >= 0.90) and (shield_energy >= 100):
    print("The dragon crumples in a heap. You rescue the princess!")
else:
    print("Your attack has no effect, the dragon fries you to a crisp!")</textarea>
```

This version is probably the best of the three, because it very closely matches
the initial English statement. Clarity of our code (for other humans),
and making it easy to see that the code does what was expected should always
be a high priority.

As our programming skills develop we&#8217;ll find we have
more than one way to solve any problem.  So good programs are *designed*.
We make choices that favour clarity, simplicity, and elegance.  The job
title *software architect* says a lot about what we do &#8212; we are *architects*
who engineer our products to balance beauty, functionality, simplicity and
clarity in our creations.

Tip

Once our program works, we should play around a bit trying to polish it up.
Write good comments.  Think about whether the code would be clearer with
different variable names.  Could we have done it more elegantly?  Should
we rather use a function?  Can we simplify the conditionals?

We think of our code as our creation, our work of art!  We make it great.

## Type conversion

We&#8217;ve had a first look at this in an earlier chapter.  Seeing it again won&#8217;t hurt!

Many Python types come with a built-in function that attempts to convert values
of another type into its own type. The ```int``` function, for example,
takes any value and converts it to an integer, if possible, or complains
otherwise:

```
>>> int("32")
32
>>> int("Hello")
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<pyshell#6>", line 1, in <module>
    int("hello")
ValueError: invalid literal for int() with base 10: &#39;hello&#39;
```

```int``` can also convert floating-point values to integers, but remember
that it truncates the fractional part:


```
>>> int(-2.3)
-2
>>> int(3.99999)
3
>>> int("42")
42
>>> int(1.0)
1
```

The ```float``` function converts integers and strings to floating-point
numbers:


```
>>> float(32)
32.0
>>> float("3.14159")
3.14159
>>> float(1)
1.0
```

It may seem odd that Python distinguishes the integer value ```1``` from the
floating-point value ```1.0```. They may represent the same number, but they
belong to different types. The reason is that they are represented differently
inside the computer.

The ```str``` function converts any argument given to it to type
```string```:


```
>>> str(32)
&#39;32&#39;
>>> str(3.14149)
&#39;3.14149&#39;
>>> str(True)
&#39;True&#39;
>>> str(true)
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<pyshell#7>", line 1, in <module>
    str(true)
NameError: name &#39;true&#39; is not defined
```

```str``` will work with any value and convert it into a string.  As
mentioned earlier, ```True``` is Boolean value; ```true``` is just an ordinary variable name,
and is not defined here, so we get an error.

## Boolean functions

Functions can return Boolean values, which is often convenient for hiding
complicated tests inside functions. For example:


```
def is_divisible(x, y):
    """ Test if x is exactly divisible by y """
    if x % y == 0:
        return True
    else:
        return False

print(is_divisible(10,5))  # should print True
print(is_divisible(10,7))  # should print False
```


It is common to give **Boolean
functions** names that sound like yes/no questions.  ```is_divisible``` returns
either ```True``` or ```False``` to indicate whether the ```x``` is or is not
divisible by ```y```.

We can make the function more concise by taking advantage of the fact that the
condition of the ```if``` statement is itself a Boolean expression. We can return
it directly, avoiding the ```if``` statement altogether:


```
def is_divisible(x, y):
    """ Test if x is exactly divisible by y """
    return x % y == 0

print(is_divisible(10,5))  # should print True
print(is_divisible(10,7))  # should print False
```

Boolean functions are often used in conditional statements:

```
if is_divisible(x, y):
    ... # Do something ...
else:
    ... # Do something else ...
```

It might be tempting to write something like:


```
if is_divisible(x, y) == True:
```

but the extra comparison is unnecessary.

