+++
title = "Logical opposites"
weight = 407
+++

## Logical opposites

Each of the six relational operators has a logical opposite: for example,
suppose we can get a driver&#8217;s licence when our age is greater or equal to 16,
we can *not* get the driver&#8217;s licence when we are less than 16.

Notice that the opposite of ```>=``` is ```<```.

<div><table border="1" class="docutils">
<colgroup>
<col width="33%" />
<col width="67%" />
</colgroup>
<thead valign="bottom">
<tr class="row-odd"><th class="head">operator</th>
<th class="head">logical opposite</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody valign="top">
<tr class="row-even"><td>==</td>
<td>!=</td>
</tr>
<tr class="row-odd"><td>!=</td>
<td>==</td>
</tr>
<tr class="row-even"><td><</td>
<td>>=</td>
</tr>
<tr class="row-odd"><td><=</td>
<td>></td>
</tr>
<tr class="row-even"><td>></td>
<td><=</td>
</tr>
<tr class="row-odd"><td>>=</td>
<td><</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div>

Understanding these logical opposites allows us to sometimes get rid of ```not```
operators.  ```not``` operators are often quite difficult to read in computer code, and
our intentions will usually be clearer if we can eliminate them.

For example, if we wrote this Python:

```
if not (age >= 17):
    print("Hey, you are too young to get a driver's licence!")
```

it would probably be clearer to use the simplification laws, and to
write instead:

```
if age < 17:
    print("Hey, you are too young to get a driver's licence!")
```

Two powerful simplification laws (called de Morgan&#8217;s laws) that are often
helpful when dealing with complicated Boolean expressions are:

```
not (x and y)  ==  (not x) or (not y)
not (x or y)   ==  (not x) and (not y)
```

For example, suppose we can slay the dragon only if our magic
lightsabre sword is charged to 90% or higher,
and we have 100 or more energy units in our protective shield.
We find this fragment of Python code in the game:

```
if not ((sword_charge >= 0.90) and (shield_energy >= 100)):
    print("Your attack has no effect, the dragon fries you to a crisp!")
else:
    print("The dragon crumples in a heap. You rescue the princess!")
```


de Morgan&#8217;s laws together with the logical opposites would let us
rework the condition in a (perhaps) easier to understand way like this:

```
if (sword_charge < 0.90) or (shield_energy < 100):
    print("Your attack has no effect, the dragon fries you to a crisp!")
else:
    print("The dragon crumples in a heap. You rescue the princess!")
```

We could also get rid of the ```not``` by swapping around the ```then``` and
```else``` parts of the conditional.  So here is a third version, also equivalent:

```
if (sword_charge >= 0.90) and (shield_energy >= 100):
    print("The dragon crumples in a heap. You rescue the princess!")
else:
    print("Your attack has no effect, the dragon fries you to a crisp!")</textarea>
```

This version is probably the best of the three, because it very closely matches
the initial English statement. Clarity of our code (for other humans),
and making it easy to see that the code does what was expected should always
be a high priority.

As our programming skills develop we&#8217;ll find we have
more than one way to solve any problem.  So good programs are *designed*.
We make choices that favour clarity, simplicity, and elegance.  The job
title *software architect* says a lot about what we do &#8212; we are *architects*
who engineer our products to balance beauty, functionality, simplicity and
clarity in our creations.

Tip

Once our program works, we should play around a bit trying to polish it up.
Write good comments.  Think about whether the code would be clearer with
different variable names.  Could we have done it more elegantly?  Should
we rather use a function?  Can we simplify the conditionals?

We think of our code as our creation, our work of art!  We make it great.